
===== PAGE 1 =====
1-11-2
1-3
1-4
1-51-6
Page 2
Chapter One
Introduction to Accounting and Financial Reporting forGovernment and Not‐for‐Profit Entities
© Molli Lowry/Alamy RF
Learning ObjectivesAfter studying this chapter, you should be able to:
Identify and explain the characteristics that distinguish government and not-for-profit entities from for-profit entities.Identify the authoritative bodies responsible for setting financial reporting standards for (1) state and localgovernments, (2) the federal government, and (3) not-for-profit organizations.Contrast and compare the objectives of financial reporting for (1) state and local governments, (2) the federalgovernment, and (3) not-for-profit organizations.Explain the minimum requirements for general purpose external financial reporting for state and local governments andhow they relate to comprehensive annual financial reports.Identify and describe the required financial statements for the federal government.Identify and describe the required financial statements for not-for-profit organizations.
WELCOME TO GOVERNMENT AND NOT-FOR-PROFIT ACCOUNTINGWelcome to the new world of accounting for government and not-for-profit organizations! Initially, you willlikely find it challenging to understand the many new terms and concepts introduced. Additionally, if you are likemost readers, you will question at the outset why government and not-for-profit organizations use accounting andfinancial reporting practices that are different from those used by for-profit entities.As you read this first chapter of the text, the reasons for the differences between government and not-for-profit accounting and for-profit accounting should become apparent. Specifically, government and not-for-profit organizations serve entirely different purposes in society than do business entities. Because such organizationsare largely financed by taxpayers, donors, and others who do not expect benefits proportional to the resources theyprovide, management has a special duty to be accountable for how resources are used in providing services. Thus,the need for managers to be accountable to citizens, creditors, oversight bodies, and others has played a central rolein shaping the accounting and reporting practices of government and not-for-profit organizations.This first chapter will give you a basic conceptual understanding of the unique characteristics of government and

===== PAGE 2 =====
Page 3
not-for-profit organizations and how their accounting and financial reporting concepts and practices differ fromthose of for-profit organizations. By the time you finish subsequent chapters assigned for your course, you shouldhave an in-depth practical knowledge of government and not-for-profit accounting and financial reporting.
DISTINGUISHING GOVERNMENT AND NOT-FOR-PROFIT ORGANIZATIONS
LO 1-1Identify and explain the characteristics that distinguish government and not-for-profit entities from for-profitentities.
What Are Government and Not-for-Profit Organizations?Government and not-for-profit organizations are vast in number and range of services provided. In the United States,governments exist at the federal, state, and local levels and serve a wide variety of functions. The most recent censusof governments reports that there are 90,056 local governments, in addition to the federal government and 50 stategovernments. These 90,056 local governments consist of 3,031 counties, 19,519 municipalities, 16,360 towns andtownships, 12,880 independent school districts, and 38,266 other special district governments that derive their powerfrom state governments.1
States, counties, municipalities (for example, cities, towns, and villages), and townships are general purposegovernments—governments that provide a wide range of services to their residents (such as police and fireprotection; sanitation; construction and maintenance of streets, roads, and bridges; and culture and recreation).Independent school districts, public colleges and universities, and special districts are special purpose governments—governments that provide only a single function or a limited number of functions (such as education, drainage andflood control, irrigation, soil and water conservation, fire protection, and water supply). Similar to general purposegovernments, special purpose governments are provided the power by state laws to levy and collect taxes and toraise revenues from nontax sources to finance the services they provide.Not-for-profit organizations also exist in many forms and serve many different functions in society. These includeprivate colleges and universities, various kinds of community service and health care organizations, certain librariesand museums, professional and trade associations, fraternal and social organizations, and religious organizations.According to the NCCS Business Master file of April 2016, as of 2014 there are nearly 1.6 million not-for-profitorganizations receiving tax-exempt status in the United States.2
Distinguishing Characteristics of Government and Not-for-ProfitOrganizationsGovernment and not-for-profit organizations differ in important ways from business organizations. Anunderstanding of how these organizations differ from business organizations is essential to understanding the uniqueaccounting and financial reporting principles that have evolved for government and not-for-profit organizations.In its Statement of Financial Accounting Concepts No. 4, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB)noted the following characteristics that it felt distinguished government and not-for-profit organizations frombusiness organizations:
a. Receipts of significant amounts of resources from resource providers who do not expect to receive eitherrepayment or economic benefits proportionate to the resources provided.b. Operating purposes that are other than to provide goods or services at a profit or profit equivalent.c. Absence of defined ownership interests that can be sold, transferred, or redeemed or that convey entitlement toa share of a residual distribution of resources in the event of liquidation of the organization.3
The Governmental Accounting Standards Board (GASB) distinguishes government entities in the United Statesfrom both not-for-profit and business entities by stressing that governments exist in an environment in which thepower ultimately rests in the hands of the people. Voters delegate that power to public officials through the electionprocess. The power is divided among the executive, legislative, and judicial branches of the government, so that theactions, financial and otherwise, of government executives are constrained by legislative actions, and executive andlegislative actions are subject to judicial review. Further constraints are imposed on state and local governments bythe federal government. In the United States, higher levels of government encourage or dictate activities of lower-

===== PAGE 3 =====
Page 5
Page 4
level governments. Higher levels of government partially or wholly finance some activities using an extensivesystem of intergovernmental grants and subsidies that require the lower levels to be accountable to the entityproviding the resources, as well as to the citizenry.Revenues raised by each level of government come, ultimately, from taxpayers. Taxpayers are involuntarycontributors of revenue to governments, which effectively have monopoly power in most instances. As involuntarycontributors of revenue, taxpayers often have little choice over the level of services they receive. The lack of acompetitive market and the disconnect between the revenues provided by taxpayers and the cost for the level ofservice received means that unlike for-profit organizations, a “net income” figure cannot be used to assessgovernment performance. Because there is no one “net income” figure that can be used to assess overall governmentefficiency and effectiveness, there is a great need for public accountability in financial reporting.4
SOURCES OF FINANCIAL REPORTING STANDARDS
LO 1-2Identify the authoritative bodies responsible for setting financial reporting standards for (1) state and localgovernments, (2) the federal government, and (3) not-for-profit organizations.
As shown in Illustration 1–1, Rule 203 of the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA) Code ofProfessional Conduct formally designates the GASB, FASB, and FASAB as the authoritative bodies to establishgenerally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) for state and local governments, nongovernmental not-for-profitorganizations, and the federal government, respectively. In practice, the “authority to establish accountingprinciples” means the “authority to establish accounting and financial reporting standards.”
ILLUSTRATION 1–1 Primary Sources of Accounting and Financial Reporting Standards for Businesses,Governments, and Not-for-Profit Organizations
Authority to establish accounting and reporting standards for not-for-profit organizations is split between the FASBand the GASB because a sizable number of not-for-profit organizations are governmental in nature, particularlypublic colleges and universities and government hospitals. Governmental not-for-profit organizations followstandards established by the GASB. The FASB is responsible for setting accounting and reporting standards for not-for-profit organizations that are independent of governments.The GASB and the FASB are parallel bodies under the oversight of the Financial Accounting Foundation, whichappoints the members of the two boards and supports the boards’ operations. The federal Sarbanes-Oxley Actmandates an assessed fee on corporate security offerings to support the FASB, while the Dodd-Frank Wall StreetReform and Consumer Protection Act (2010) required the establishment of an accounting support fee to fund theGASB. In February 2012 the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (FINRA) established such a fee.5 The fee iscollected from each firm that reports municipal securities trades to the Municipal Securities Rule-Making Board.Because of the method of support and the lack of ties to any single organization or government, the GASBand the FASB are referred to as “independent standards-setting boards in the private sector.” Before thecreation of the GASB and the FASB, financial reporting standards were set by groups sponsored by professionalorganizations: The forerunners of the GASB (formed in 1984) were the National Council on GovernmentalAccounting (1973–84), the National Committee on Governmental Accounting (1948–73), and the National

===== PAGE 4 =====
Page 6
Committee on Municipal Accounting (1934–41). The forerunners of the FASB (formed in 1973) were theAccounting Principles Board (1959–73) and the Committee on Accounting Procedure (1938–59) of the AmericanInstitute of Certified Public Accountants.Federal statutes assign responsibility for establishing and maintaining a sound financial structure for the federalgovernment to three officials: the Comptroller General, the Director of the Office of Management and Budget, andthe Secretary of the Treasury. In 1990, these three officials created the Federal Accounting Standards AdvisoryBoard (FASAB) to recommend accounting principles and standards for the federal government and its agencies. It isunderstood that, to the maximum extent possible, federal accounting and financial reporting standards should beconsistent with those established by the GASB and, where applicable, by the FASB.
OBJECTIVES OF FINANCIAL REPORTING
LO 1-3Contrast and compare the objectives of financial reporting for (1) state and local governments, (2) the federalgovernment, and (3) not-for-profit organizations.
As indicated earlier, due to the nature of government, there is a great need for public accountability. The need forpublic accountability led the GASB to state that “Accountability is the cornerstone of all financial reporting ingovernment.”6 Accountability requires governments to justify the raising and use of public resources, such as taxes.Government financial reports can provide citizens with the information needed to help with the public debate aboutthe sources and uses of public resources.Illustration 1–2 shows several ways that state and local government financial reporting is used in makingeconomic, social, and political decisions and assessing accountability. Closely related to the concept ofaccountability as the cornerstone of government financial reporting is the concept the GASB refers to as interperiodequity. Interperiod equity can most simply be defined as ensuring that the government “lives within its means.” TheGASB believes that interperiod equity is an important part of government accountability.7 As such, financialreporting should provide information that assists users in evaluating whether the current period’s resources aresufficient to support the current period’s services. When the cost of the current period services is greater than theresources available, the excess costs become the burden of future taxpayers who have not received the benefit of theservices.
ILLUSTRATION 1–2 Comparison of Financial Reporting Objectives—State and Local Governments,Federal Government, and Not-for-Profit Organizations
a) Source: GASB, Concepts Statement No. 1, par. 32.b) Source: FASAB, Statement of Federal Accounting Concepts No. 1, par. 134.c) Source: FASB, Concepts Statement No. 4, pars. 33—42.
Accountability is also the foundation for the financial reporting objectives the FASAB has established for the federalgovernment. The FASAB’s Statement of Accounting and Reporting Concepts Statement No. 1 identifies fourobjectives of federal financial reporting (see Illustration 1–2) focused on evaluating budgetary integrity, operatingperformance, stewardship, and adequacy of systems and controls. Budgetary integrity relates to beingpublicly accountable for complying with laws and regulations related to the raising and spending of taxesand other resources received by the federal government during a fiscal year. Financial reporting also should helpusers assess the operating performance of the federal government. In addition to information on the cost of

===== PAGE 5 =====
Page 7
providing services, it is important to be able to evaluate the efficiency and effectiveness with which the governmentis managing its assets and liabilities. Stewardship relates to providing information on the financial position of thegovernment. Financial reporting should assist in evaluating the government’s operating performance and itsinvestments for the period to determine whether the financial condition of the federal government has improved ordeteriorated. Finally, federal financial reporting should help users in determining whether adequate internal andadministrative control systems are in place.Unlike the FASB and the GASB, which focus their standards on external financial reporting, the FASAB and itssponsors in the federal government are concerned with both internal and external financial reporting. Accordingly,the FASAB has identified four major groups of users of federal financial reports: citizens, Congress, executives, andprogram managers. Given the broad role the FASAB has been assigned, its standards focus on cost accounting andperformance measures, as well as on financial accounting and reporting.Financial reports of not-for-profit organizations—voluntary health and welfare organizations, private colleges anduniversities, private health care institutions, religious organizations, and others—have similar uses. However, asIllustration 1–2 shows, the reporting objectives for not-for-profit organizations emphasize decision usefulness overfinancial accountability needs. The FASB Statement of Financial Accounting Concepts No. 4 indicates that not-for-profit and business enterprises are similar in many ways, thus the emphasis on decision usefulness in assisting userswith decisions regarding the allocation of scarce resources to a not-for-profit’s objectives. A significant componentof the decision on where to allocate scarce resources is the services the not-for-profit organization provides and itsability to continue to provide those services. To ensure ongoing service, resource providers and others are interestedin management’s stewardship, that is, its custody and safekeeping of the not-for-profit’s assets and their efficientand effective use.Note that the objectives of financial reporting for governments and not-for-profit organizations stress theneed for the public to understand and evaluate the financial activities and management of theseorganizations. Readers will recognize the impact on their lives, and on their bank accounts, of the activities of thelayers of government they are obligated to support and of the not-for-profit organizations they voluntarily support.Because each of us is significantly affected by government and not-for-profit organizations, it is important that webe able to read intelligently the financial reports of these organizations. In order to make informed decisions ascitizens, taxpayers, creditors, and donors, readers should make the effort to learn the accounting and financialreporting standards developed by the authoritative bodies. The standards are further explained and illustratedthroughout the remainder of the text.
OVERVIEW OF FINANCIAL REPORTING FOR STATE AND LOCALGOVERNMENTS, THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT, AND NOT-FOR-PROFITORGANIZATIONS
Financial Reporting of State and Local Governments
LO 1-4Explain the minimum requirements for general purpose external financial reporting for state and local governmentsand how they relate to comprehensive annual financial reports.
Like the FASB, the GASB continues to develop concepts statements that communicate the framework within whichthe Board strives to establish consistent financial reporting standards for entities within its jurisdiction. The GASB,as well as the FASB, is concerned with establishing standards for financial reporting to external users—those wholack the authority to prescribe the information they want and who must rely on the information managementcommunicates to them. The Board does not intend to set standards for reporting to managers and administrators orothers deemed to have the ability to enforce their demands for information.
General Purpose External Financial ReportingIllustration 1–3 displays the minimum requirements for general purpose external financial reporting under thegovernment financial reporting model specified by the GASB.8 Central to the model is the management’s discussionand analysis (MD&A). The MD&A is required supplementary information (RSI) designed to communicate innarrative, easily readable form the purpose of the basic financial statements and the government’s current financialposition and results of financial activities compared with those of the prior year.

===== PAGE 6 =====
Page 8
ILLUSTRATION 1–3 Minimum Requirements for General Purpose External Financial Reporting
Source: GASB Codification, Sec. 2200.103.
As shown in Illustration 1–3, the GASB prescribes two categories of basic financial statements: government-wideand fund. Government-wide financial statements are intended to provide an aggregated overview of a government’snet position and changes in net position. You will notice that the GASB uses the term net position rather than theFASB term net assets; however, the terms are substantially the same. The government-wide financial statementsreport on the government as a whole and assist in assessing operational accountability—whether the government hasused its resources efficiently and effectively in meeting operating objectives. The GASB concluded that reporting onoperational accountability is best achieved by using essentially the same basis of accounting and measurement focusused by business organizations: the accrual basis and flow of economic resources measurement focus.Fund financial statements, the other category of basic financial statements, provide more detailed financialinformation about the government. Certain funds, referred to as governmental funds, focus on the short-termflow of current financial resources rather than on the flow of economic resources.9 The focus on current financialresources makes it easier for users assessing fiscal accountability, which relates to ensuring the government iscomplying with the public’s decisions concerning the raising and spending of resources generally within a budgetaryperiod of one year. Because of the short-term focus, governmental funds use a modified accrual basis of accountingrather than the accrual basis. Under modified accrual, revenues are recognized in the period they are measurable andavailable for spending and expenditures (not expenses) are recognized when they create an obligation to be paidfrom current financial resources. The characteristics and roles of the government-wide and fund financial statementsare summarized in Illustration 1–4.
ILLUSTRATION 1–4 Dual Roles of Government Financial Statements in Assessing Accountability
Other funds, referred to as proprietary and fiduciary funds, account for the business-type and certain fiduciary (trustand custodial) activities of the government. These funds follow accounting and reporting principles similar to thoseof business organizations.As shown in Illustration 1–3, the notes to the financial statements are considered integral to the financialstatements. In addition, governments are required to disclose certain RSI other than MD&A. These additionalinformation disclosures are discussed in several of the following chapters.
Comprehensive Annual Financial ReportSerious users of government financial information need more detail than is found in the MD&A, basic financialstatements, and RSI (other than MD&A). For state and local governments, much of that detail is found in the

===== PAGE 7 =====
Page 9
Page 10
government’s comprehensive annual financial report (CAFR). Although governments are not required to prepare aCAFR, most do so as a matter of public record and to provide additional financial details beyond the minimumrequirements shown in Illustration 1–3. As such, the GASB provides standards for the content of a CAFR in itsannually updated publication Codification of Governmental Accounting and Financial Reporting Standards.A CAFR prepared in conformity with these standards should contain the following sections.10
Introductory Section11
The introductory section typically includes items such as a title page and contents page, a letter of transmittal, adescription of the government, and other items deemed appropriate by management. The letter of transmittal may beliterally that—a letter from the chief financial officer addressed to the chief executive and governing body of thegovernment—or it may be a narrative over the signature of the chief executive. In either event, the letter or narrativematerial should cite legal and policy requirements for the report.
Financial Section
The financial section of a comprehensive annual financial report should include (1) an auditor’s report, (2)management’s discussion and analysis (MD&A), (3) basic financial statements and related notes, (4) requiredsupplementary information (other than MD&A), and (5) other supplementary information, such as combiningstatements and individual fund statements and schedules. Items (2), (3), and (4) represent the minimum requirementsfor general purpose external financial reporting, as depicted in Illustration 1–3. As you will recognize, a CAFRprovides additional supplementary financial information beyond the minimum amount required by generallyaccepted accounting principles.Laws regarding the audit of governments vary from state to state. Some states have laws requiring that all stateagencies and all local governments be audited by an audit agency of the state government. In most states, however,local governments are audited by independent public accounting firms. In still other states, some local governmentsare audited by the state audit agency and some by independent public accounting firms. In any event, the auditor’sopinion should accompany the financial statements reproduced in the report.The financial section should contain sufficient information to disclose fully and present fairly the financialposition and results of financial operations during the fiscal year. Laws of higher jurisdictions, actions of thelegislative branch of the government itself, and agreements with creditors and others impose constraintsover governments’ financial activities and create unique financial accountability requirements.
Statistical Section
In addition to the introductory and financial sections of the CAFR, which were just described, a CAFR shouldcontain a statistical section. The statistical section typically presents tables and charts showing demographic andeconomic data, financial trends, fiscal capacity, and operating information of the government in the detail needed byreaders who are more than casually interested in the activities of the government. The GASB Codification requires aspecific set of statistical tables for inclusion in a CAFR. The statistical section is discussed at greater length inChapter 9 of this text.
Financial Reporting of the Federal Government
LO 1-5Identify and describe the required financial statements for the federal government.
U.S. Government-wide Financial ReportingFor more than a decade, the Department of the Treasury has prepared a prototype financial report for the U.S.government as a whole.12 The financial report includes a “plain language” Citizen’s Guide, a management’sdiscussion and analysis (MD&A), several financial statements,13 and supplemental information that reports on boththe government’s budget and proprietary financial activities, as well as reconciliation of the two. Of particularinterest is a statement of social insurance (e.g., Social Security and Medicare, among other commitments) that

===== PAGE 8 =====
Page 11
reflects an excess of the present value of future actuarial expenditures over revenues at the end of fiscal year 2016 ofmore than $46.7 trillion.Although the federal government’s consolidated financial statements are audited, readers may be shocked to learnthat despite the enormous dollar amounts involved, the U.S. Comptroller General has never been able to issue anunmodified audit opinion on the federal government’s consolidated financial statements. In general, serious internalcontrol over financial reporting, financial management problems at the Department of Defense, reconciliation issues,and ineffective processes for preparing the consolidated financial statements are cited for the Comptroller General’scontinuing disclaimer of opinion. These deficiencies are explained in greater detail in Chapter 17.
Federal Department and Agency Financial ReportingThe federal Office of Management and Budget’s (OMB) Circular A-136 requires major federal departments andagencies to prepare a performance and accountability report (PAR) that includes an annual performance report(APR), annual financial statements, and a variety of management reports on internal control and other accountabilityissues. A PAR is intended to increase accountability by providing both financial and performance information thathelps users in assessing how well an agency of the federal government is carrying out its mission. There are foursections in a PAR:
1. An MD&A, which serves as a brief overview of the entire PAR and clearly describes the department oragency’s mission and organizational structure; its performance goals, objectives, and results; analysis of itsfinancial statements; and analysis of information about internal controls and legal compliance.2. Performance information. The APR provides information about the agency’s performance andprogress in achieving its performance goals.3. Basic financial statements. These include a balance sheet, statement of net cost (essentially an operatingstatement format that is presented with expenses reported before revenues; that is, program costs minus earnedrevenues results in net cost), statement of changes in net position (similar to changes in owners’ equity inbusiness accounting), statement of budgetary resources, statement of custodial activity, and statement of socialinsurance.4. Other accompanying information, such as perspectives on the tax burden, size of the tax gap, challenges facingmanagement, and revenue forgone.
Federal government financial reporting places a strong emphasis on management’s performance, in addition to thereporting of financial information. Chapter 17 explains federal department and agency financial reportingrequirements in much greater detail and provides examples of each financial statement.
Financial Reporting of Not-for-Profit Organizations (NFPs)
LO 1-6Identify and describe the required financial statements for not-for-profit organizations.
Most NFPs are nongovernmental in nature and, therefore, follow FASB accounting and financial reportingstandards. The primary purpose of NFP financial statements is to provide decision-useful financial information toexternal users, principally resource providers such as donors, members, and creditors, among others. Resourceproviders have in common the need to assess (1) the services provided by an NFP and the ability of the NFP tocontinue to provide those services and (2) management’s performance and stewardship of resources.14 To meet thesereporting needs, FASB standards require NFPs to prepare a set of organizationwide financial statements that includea statement of financial position (balance sheet), a statement of activities (income statement), and a statement ofcash flows.15 In addition, NFPs are required to provide information showing the relationship between functionalexpenses and natural expense classifications such as personnel, travel, and supplies. This information can beprovided in one of three ways: (1) on the statement of activities, (2) in a schedule in the notes to the financialstatements, or (3) as a separate financial statement.16 Chapter 14 provides examples of all these statements.Many NFPs depend heavily on donor contributions to finance their operations. Donors often impose restrictionson the use of contributions, such as specifying that their contribution be used for a particular purpose or in aparticular time period. Donor-imposed restrictions may be temporary or, in the case of certain endowments,permanent. Permanent endowments require the NFP to maintain the principal amount of the contribution in

===== PAGE 9 =====
Page 12
Page 13
perpetuity but permit the use of earnings on invested principal, either without restriction or for a particular restrictedpurpose.FASB standards recognize the essential need for management to demonstrate accountability for donor-restrictedresources. Specifically, the standards require that an NFP’s statement of financial position report net assets (theexcess of total assets over total liabilities) in two categories: net assets with donor restrictions and net assets withoutdonor restrictions.17 The statement of activities reports increases and decreases in each of the two categories of netassets.In addition, it is important that an NFP’s statement of activities report expenses incurred for directsupport of programs separately from support activities, which are titled management and general expensesand fund-raising costs. Reporting expenses in this way is an important aspect of accountability because it allowsdonors, oversight bodies, and others to calculate what percentage of total expenses is being incurred for programpurposes, rather than for overhead and fund-raising. Would you want to contribute to an NFP that spent more foradministrative support and fund-raising than for its core mission?Similar to for-profit entities, the FASB allows NFPs to prepare the statement of cash flows using the direct orindirect method. However, the FASB does not require NFP organizations using the indirect method to prepare thereconciliation section of the statement.NFP organizations’ need for audited financial statements varies as a result of state regulations, creditorrequirements, and grantor requirements. If an NFP organization expends federal grant funds that exceed a certainthreshold, it is subject to the same federal audit requirements as would be required for state and local governments.As with state and local government and federal government financial reporting, a complete discussion of NFPfinancial reporting is deferred to later chapters of the text. Chapters 13 through 16 will provide you with a morecomprehensive understanding of NFP accounting and financial reporting, for both nongovernmental andgovernmental NFPs.
EXPANDING THE SCOPE OF ACCOUNTABILITY REPORTINGSome governments publish highly condensed popular reports. These reports usually contain selected data from theaudited financial statements, statistical data, graphic displays, and narrative explanations, but the reports themselvesare not audited. Additional information on popular reporting is provided in Chapter 9. In addition, many state andlocal governments have begun to identify and report nonfinancial performance measures. For nearly 20 years, theGASB has encouraged state and local governments to experiment with reporting service efforts andaccomplishments (SEA) measures to provide more complete information about a government’s performance thancan be provided by basic financial statements, budgetary comparison schedules, and other required or supplementaryschedules. Indicators of service efforts include inputs of nonmonetary resources as well as inputs of dollars.Indicators of service accomplishments include both outputs and outcomes; outputs are quantitative measures ofwork done, such as the number of juvenile cases handled, and outcomes are the impacts of outputs on programobjectives, such as a reduction in the high school dropout rate or incidence of juvenile crime. Chapter 12 providesadditional discussion of SEA measures.The FASB also recognizes that SEA measures can provide valuable information to NFP resource providersbecause performance cannot generally be measured by the organization’s profits and the resource providers arefrequently not the beneficiaries of the NFP’s goods or services.18 However, due to the fact that no standardizedmethod of measuring and reporting service accomplishments exists, the FASB does not include it as part of thefinancial reporting requirements, but similar to the GASB, it encourages the provision of such information inaddition to the information provided by financial reports.
OVERVIEW OF CHAPTERS 2 THROUGH 17
GASB Principles, Standards, and Financial ReportingPart I of the text (Chapters 2–9) focuses on state and local governments. The principles that underlie GASBaccounting and reporting standards are presented in Chapter 2. Chapters 3 through 8 provide detailed illustrations ofthe effect of financial transactions on the funds and government-wide statements. Financial reporting for state andlocal governments is described in detail in Chapter 9.
Accountability for Public Funds

===== PAGE 10 =====
Page 14
Part II of the text includes three chapters that describe ways that public financial managers provide accountabilityover funds entrusted to them. Chapter 10 provides information on how to analyze the financial performance of stateand local governments based on financial and other information. Auditing techniques designed to assure the publicthat funds are properly recognized and spent efficiently and effectively are described in Chapter 11, with specialattention devoted to areas of auditing that are unique to federal funds, such as single audits. Chapter 12 covers toolsimportant to managers in demonstrating accountability for funds, such as budgeting, costing, and performancemeasurement.
Not-for-Profit Organizations and the Federal GovernmentPart III is a set of four chapters covering the unique accounting and financial reporting issues facing entities in thenot-for-profit sector and a final chapter on accounting and financial reporting for the federal government. Thegovernance and regulatory issues that a not-for-profit organization faces from the time of its incorporation throughmerger or dissolution, if any, are presented in Chapter 13. Chapter 14 provides detailed illustrations of the effect offinancial transactions on the financial statements of not-for-profit organizations, much like Chapters 3 through 8 dofor state and local governments. Chapters 15 and 16 present industry-specific accounting and financial reportingrequirements for colleges and universities and health care organizations, respectively. Chapter 17 focuses on thefederal government, the largest provider of public funds, and introduces federal offices that interact with state andlocal governments and not-for-profit organizations in a variety of ways; for example, the GovernmentAccountability Office (GAO) and the Office of Management and Budget (OMB).
A CAVEATThe first edition of this text was written by the late Professor R. M. Mikesell more than 65 years ago in 1951. Somewords of his bear thoughtful rereading from time to time by teachers and students in all fields, not just thoseconcerned with accounting and financial reporting for government and not-for-profit organizations:
Even when developed to the ultimate stage of perfection, governmental accounting cannot become a guarantyof good government. At best, it can never be more than a valuable tool for promotion of sound financialmanagement. It does not offer a panacea for all the ills that beset representative government; nor will it fullyovercome the influence of disinterested, uninformed citizens. It cannot be substituted for honesty and moralintegrity on the part of public officials; it can help in resisting but cannot eliminate the demands of selfishinterests, whether in the form of individual citizens, corporations, or the pressure groups which always aboundto influence government at all levels.19
Key TermsAccountability 5Basic financial statements 7Comprehensive annual financial report (CAFR) 8Donor-imposed restrictions 11Federal Accounting Standards Advisory Board (FASAB) 5Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) 3Fiscal accountability 8Fund financial statements 7General purpose governments 2Generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) 4Governmental Accounting Standards Board (GASB) 3Government-wide financial statements 7Interperiod equity 5Management’s discussion and analysis (MD&A) 7Modified accrual 8

===== PAGE 11 =====
1–1.1–2.
1–3.
1–4.
1–5.1–6.
1–7.
1–8.
1–9.
1–10. Page 15
1–11.
1–12.
Operational accountability 7Performance and accountability report (PAR) 10Required supplementary information (RSI) 7Service efforts and accomplishments (SEA) 12Special purpose governments 2
QuestionsIdentify some differences between business organizations and government/not-for-profit organizations.Using GP for general purpose government or SP for special purpose government, identify thefollowing governments by type.a. Stonington Village.b. Lynnford Regional Library District.c. Hillsborough County Independent School District.d. Missoula, Montana.e. Pulaski County Public Works District.f. Hohenstein Township.
Which standard-setting bodies have responsibility for establishing accounting and reporting standardsfor (1) state and local governments, (2) business organizations, (3) not-for-profit organizations, and (4)the federal government and its agencies and departments?The Beth House Museum is a nongovernmental not-for-profit organization. At the annual meeting, oneof the new board members said, “I took a couple of accounting classes in college and we can choose touse either the FASB rules or the GASB rules.” Do you agree with the board member? Why or whynot?Explain the meaning and significance of interperiod equity.Explain the purpose of operational accountability and the purpose of fiscal accountability. Whichcategory of financial statements is most useful in reporting on each of these accountability concepts?What is the primary financial reporting objective for not-for-profit organizations? How does this differfrom the primary financial reporting objective for a government?What are the three sections of a comprehensive annual financial report (CAFR)? What information iscontained in each section? How do the minimum requirements for general purpose external financialreporting relate in scope to the CAFR?Identify and describe the four sections of a federal department or agency’s performance andaccountability report.A not-for-profit organization is required to report expenses incurred for programs separatelyfrom management and general expenses and fund-raising costs. Explain who would use thisinformation and why this separation matters.
CasesResearch Case—GASB. (LO1-1) Access the Governmental Accounting Standards Board website atwww.GASB.org. Find the GASB White Paper on “Why Governmental Accounting and FinancialReporting Is—and Should Be—Different.” There are numerous differences between governments andfor-profits in the accounting and reporting of financial transactions. Two accounting and reportingdifferences between governments and for-profit organizations relate to capital assets and majorrevenue sources. Using the information in the White Paper and your knowledge from your financialaccounting courses (refer to a financial accounting textbook or the FASB website [www.FASB.org] ifyou need a refresher), discuss why there are accounting and reporting differences related to capitalassets and the organizations' major revenue sources (sales and property tax revenues).Research Case—GASB. (LO1-2) Examine the Governmental Accounting Standards Board website(www.GASB.org) and prepare a brief report about its mission, standard-setting process, and boardcomposition, and the role of the Governmental Accounting Standards Advisory Council. Can youdetermine how to obtain a copy of the most recent Codification of Governmental Accounting and

===== PAGE 12 =====
1–13.
1–14.
1–15.
Page 161–16.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Financial Reporting Standards? What would it cost to purchase or access this publication?Research Case—FASB. (LO1-5) Access the Financial Accounting Standards Board website atwww.FASB.org. Find the Accounting Standards Updates for 2016. In 2016 an update was issuedrelated to financial reporting for not-for-profit entities. After reading the 2016 update, write a briefreport that identifies how the standard changed reporting on each of the three required financialstatements.Research Case—FASB. (LO1-3) Concept Statement Four (accessible at www.FASB.org) discussesthe concepts of stewardship and performance. Given that providing decision-useful information is theprimary purpose of not-for-profit financial statements, what is the role of financial reporting relative tostewardship and performance? Write a brief report that provides your analysis.Research Case—FASAB. (LO1-2) Examine the Federal Accounting Standards Advisory Board’swebsite at www.FASAB.gov and prepare a brief report about its mission and structure and compile alist of organizations represented on its Accounting and Auditing Policy Committee. Can you obtain acopy of the full text of FASAB statements from this website? If not, how would you obtain a copy of astatement pertinent to federal agencies? What is the cost to purchase a statement?Research Case—Federal Financial Reporting Objectives. (LO1-3) Statement of FinancialAccounting Concepts 1, “Objectives of Federal Financial Reporting” athttp://www.fasab.gov/pdffiles/handbook_sffac_1.pdf identifies accountability and decisionusefulness as the fundamental values of federal governmental financial accounting and reporting. Thestatement identifies four groups of users to whom the government owes accountability and the possibleneeds of each user group.
RequiredBriefly describe the user groups, their needs for information, and how these tie into the fourobjectives of federal financial reporting identified in the statement.
Exercises and ProblemsAll applicable Exercises and Problems are available with Connect. 
1–17.Examine the CAFR. (LO1-4) Download a copy of the most recent comprehensive annual financialreport (CAFR) for a city of your choice. Many cities with 25,000 or more population provide Internetaccess to their CAFRs.* Familiarize yourself with the city’s CAFR and reread the section in thischapter titled “Financial Reporting of State and Local Governments.” Be prepared to discuss in classthe items suggested below.a. Introductory Section.What has the city included in the introductory section of its CAFR? Does it include the itemsidentified in the section of the text titled “Comprehensive Annual Financial Report”?b. Financial Section.Audit Report. Are the financial statements in the report audited by an independent CPA, stateauditors, or auditors employed by the government being audited? Does the audit indicate thatthe financial statements were prepared in accordance with GAAP? Has the city received anunmodified audit report?Basic Financial Statements. Does the CAFR contain both government-wide financialstatements and fund statements? How many financial statements have been included as partof the basic financial statements section of the CAFR?Notes to the Financial Statements. How many notes follow the required basic financialstatements? Is there a phrase at the bottom of the basic financial statements indicating thatthe notes are an integral part of the financial statements?Other Supplementary Information. Following the notes to the financial statements, does theCAFR provide other supplementary information, such as combining and individual fundstatements?Management’s Discussion and Analysis (MD&A). Does the CAFR contain an MD&A? If so,where is it located and what type of information does it contain?

===== PAGE 13 =====
Page 171–18.
Page 18
1–19.
c. Statistical Tables.What information has been included in this section of the CAFR?
Compare Financial Statements. (LO1-4, LO1-5) For this exercise refer to the Denver government-wide statement of net position (Illustration A2-1), the Denver government-wide statement ofactivities (Illustration A2-2), the Promote Health Association, Inc.'s balance sheet (Illustration14-1), and the Promote Health Association, Inc.'s statement of activities (Illustration 14-2).Requireda. Compare Denver’s statement of net position to the Promote Health Association, Inc.’sbalance sheet. What are some similarities and differences in the statement formats?b. Compare Denver’s statement of activities to the Promote Health Association, Inc. statementof activities. What are some similarities and differences in the statement formats?
Multiple Choice. (LO1-1 through LO1-6) Choose the best answer.1. Which of the following is a special purpose government?a. The State of Arkansas.b. Greene County.c. Minneapolis Public Schools.d. City of Seattle.
2. Which of the following statements is true for both governmental organizations and for-profitorganizations?a. Lack of a profit motive.b. Revenue may be earned through exchange transactions.c. Absence of owners.d. Resources are provided by individuals and entities that may not directly benefit from the useof the resources.
3. Which of the following statements regarding primary sources of accounting and financialreporting standards is false?a. The GASB sets standards for all state and local governments.b. The FASB sets standards for all business and not-for-profit entities.c. The FASB and GASB are administered by the Financial Accounting Foundation.d. The FASAB sets standards for the federal government and its agencies and departments.
4. James Black is reviewing his city’s financial reporting because he wants to run for the citycouncil. He is concerned that the city is not using its resources effectively. James is primarilyinterested ina. Fiscal accountability.b. Social accountability.c. Political accountability.d. Operational accountability.
5. The concept of interperiod equity refers to whethera. Revenues equaled or exceeded expenses for the year.b. Total assets (current and noncurrent) were sufficient to cover total liabilities (current andnoncurrent).c. Current year revenues were sufficient to pay for current year services.d. Future taxpayers can expect to receive the same or higher level of services as currenttaxpayers.
6. What are the components that are included in the minimum requirements for generalpurpose external financial reporting?a. Introductory section, financial section, and statistical section.

===== PAGE 14 =====
1–20.
Page 19
b. MD&A, government-wide financial statements, fund financial statements, notes to thefinancial statements, and RSI.c. Letter from the chief financial officer, government financial statements, notes to thefinancial statements, and RSI.d. MD&A, government-wide financial statements, notes to the financial statements, and RSI.
7. Under GASB standards, financial information useful for assessing operational accountability isprimarily reported in which financial statements?
8. Which of the following is not a required section of a federal agency or department’s performanceand accountability report (PAR)?a. A performance section, which includes an annual performance report (APR).b. An MD&A.c. A basic financial statements section.d. A statement of nonparticipation in political matters.
9. The basic financial statements of a not-for-profit include all of the following excepta. Statement of financial position.b. Statement of activities.c. Statement of changes in functional expenses.d. Statement of cash flows.
10. The primary reason that not-for-profit (NFP) organizations should report expenses incurred forprogram purposes separately from those for supporting services such as management and generaland fund-raising is thata. GASB standards require it.b. Program managers need information about the cost of activities for which they areresponsible.c. Top managers need to know how much they are spending for nonprogrammatic managementand general support.d. Donors, potential donors, oversight bodies, and others need to know what percentage of totalexpenses are being incurred for carrying out the NFP’s programs.
Matching. (LO1-1, LO1-2, LO1-4, LO1-5) For each characteristic, concept, or financial reportingrequirement listed, indicate a Y for yes in the type of organization column if the item applies to thattype of organization or N for no if it does not apply.

===== PAGE 15 =====
_____1._____2._____3._____4._____5._____6._____7._____8._____9.____10.
1–21.
Matching. (LO1-2) For each of the following entities, identify if the entity would be governed byGASB standards by placing a “G,” FASB standards by placing an “F,” or FASAB standards byplacing an “FB.” (Hint: Search the website of the entity listed if you are unsure.)EntityYour universityDepartment of DefenseAmerican Institute of Certified Public AccountantsThe county in which you liveInternal Revenue ServiceMayo ClinicNew York CityAmerican Cancer SocietyMetropolitan Washington Airports Authority (operates the Washington, DC, airports)The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York City
____________________________________________________________________________________
1 U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, Government Organizations Summary Report: 2012,http://www2.census.gov/govs/cog/g12_org.pdf.2 The National Center for Charitable Statistics, http://nccs.urban.org/statistics/quickfacts.cfm.3 Financial Accounting Standards Board, Statement of Financial Accounting Concepts No. 4, “Objectives ofFinancial Reporting by Nonbusiness Organizations” (Norwalk, CT, 1980 as amended), par. 6. In 1985 the FASBreplaced the term nonbusiness with the term not-for-profit. Other organizations use the term nonprofit as asynonym for not-for-profit. The term not-for-profit is predominantly used in this text.4 Governmental Accounting Standards Board, Concepts Statement No. 1, par. 18. Codification of GovernmentalAccounting and Financial Reporting Standards as of June 30, 2017 (Norwalk, CT, 2017), Appendix B.5 Financial Industry Regulatory Authority, Regulatory Notice 13-17, “GASB Accounting Support Fee,” April 2013.6  GASB, Codification, Appendix B, Concepts Statement No. 1, par. 56.    7 Ibid., par. 61.8 GASB Codification, Sec. 2200.102.9 The definition of fund is given in Chapter 2. For now, you can view a fund as a separate set of accounts used toaccount for resources segregated for particular purposes.10 GASB Codification, Sec. 2200.104–193.11 For a view of the introductory section, as well as the other sections of the CAFR, you may wish to look at the City

===== PAGE 16 =====
and County of Denver, Colorado’s CAFR athttps://www.denvergov.org/content/dam/denvergov/Portals/344/documents/CAFR/2016_CAFR.pdf. Portions ofDenver’s CAFR for 2016 are included for illustrative purposes in various places in this text.12 The FY 2016 Financial Report of the U.S. Government can be viewed and downloaded athttp://www.fms.treas.gov/fr/index.html.13 Financial statements included in the U.S. Government’s Consolidated Financial Report are comparativestatements of net cost, statements of operations and changes in net position, reconciliation of net operating costand unified budget deficit, statements of changes in cash balance from unified budget and other activities, balancesheets, and statements of social insurance. See Chapter 17 for more information about these statements.14 FASB ASC 958-205-05-3.15 Ibid. 958-205-05-5.16 Ibid. 958-205-45-6.17 Ibid. 958-205-05-6.18 FASB, Concepts No. 4, par. 51.19 R. M. Mikesell, Governmental Accounting, rev. ed. (Homewood, IL: Richard D. Irwin, 1956), p. 10.          
* You can usually access a city’s CAFR by doing a search on “City of (name)” and looking for a link to the city’sdepartments. At that link, select Finance Department or a department with a similar function, such as Accountingand Budgeting, and look for “Financial Reports” or similar link.